# Route Cipher Encryptor Using Hash-based Rules
## 📌 Short Summary
This project implements the Route Cipher encryption method using the Python programming language.  
In this method, plaintext is formatted using a grid system and then encrypted by reading in a clockwise spiral formation.  
The Spiral Path rules used for traverse the grid system are derived from a hash value that is generated by using the Key.

## Implementation Flow
1. Converts all input data to uppercase letters and removes any spaces
2. Places the data into a grid (in rows/columns).3. If the grid is not completely filled, pads any remaining cells in the grid using the letter 'X'.
4. Calculates hash value for the input Key.
5. The Key hash will determine:
   - Starting position: top left, top right, bottom right or bottom left
   - Direction of travel: clockwise or counter clockwise.
6. The grid system will be traversed in a clockwise spiral pattern following the rules generated from the Key's hash.
7. 7.Optionally, the user can use an **X+1 Cipher** to shift each letter forward by one before the spiral is created.


##  Hash Function
The hash function uses a weighted sum of ASCII values for calculating a hash value:
hash = Σ (ASCII value of the character * position)
This hash function guarantees that:
- Identical keys generate identical hashes
- Different keys generate different hashes

## 🔄 Spiral Path Logic
- A spiral route is used to encrypt the message instead of a simple row-by-row/column-by-column reading of the Ascii characters in the input message.- The starting position and direction of the route are based on the hash of the key which makes the cyphering less predictable.

## ➕ X+1 Cipher (Optional)

- Every letter shifts one position to the right
  - A→B  
  - B→C  
  - ...  
  - Z→A  
- This step is optional and is selected by user at the time of execution.

## ▶️ Running The Program
1. Ensure Python is installed.
2. > Execute the python script as follows:
```
python route_cipher.py
```
3.> Provide the following input
    - Text
    - Key
    - Number of rows
    - Number of columns
    - Should X+1 cipher be used

## 📂 Example Input / Output

***INPUT***
TEXT = HELLO WORLD  
KEY = KEY  
ROWS = 3  
COLUMNS = 4  

***OUTPUT***
Encrpted text based on the spiral of the Route Cipher

## 💡 Features

- Hashing to generate rules
- Spiral of multiple patterns
- Starting position flexibility
- X+1 cipher as an option
- Well structured, modular code

## 🧾Summary
This project showed how the process of creating a route cipher with an alternative method for generating encrypted text based on different traversal methods can be enhanced by using hashing and varying start positions to create more random and unpredictable encrypted text.
